Prepared Remarks:
Operator

Good morning, my name is Michelle and I will be your conference operator today. At this time I would like to welcome everyone to the AMAG Pharmaceuticals First Quarter 2020 Earnings Call. [Operator Instructions].

It is now my pleasure to turn today's call over to me, Linda Lennox, Vice President, Investor Relations. You may begin your conference.

Linda Lennox -- Vice President of Investor Relations and Corporate Communications

Thank you, Michelle. Good morning and welcome to the AMAG Pharmaceuticals conference call to discuss our first quarter 2020 financial results. Earlier this morning we issued a press release. For those of you who don't have a copy, you can access it in the Investors' section of our website at amagpharma.com.

Please be reminded that remarks made during this call may include forward-looking statements pursuant to the Safe Harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. We want to emphasize that these forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those discussed in such forward-looking statements. Please refer to our 2019 Form 10-K, our Form 10-Qs and 8-Ks, as well as statements included in our presentation remarks, for a full review of the risks and uncertainties associated with our business.

On today's call, we will discuss certain non-GAAP by the initial measures with respect to our performance. We use these non-GAAP measures for financial and operational decision-making and as a means to evaluate our performance, because we believe they better represent the ongoing economics of our business. The definitions of our non-GAAP measures are set-forth in our earnings release, which was filed with the SEC today. Copies may be obtained at sec.gov and in the Investors section of our website.

We are conducting today's call with participants in different locations given the COVID-19 pandemic. So we ask that you please bear with us if there are any technical issues. We do have a team and a process in place to handle issues, should any arise. With me on today's call are Scott Myers, our newly appointed President and CEO; Ted, Myles, our Chief Operating and Chief Financial Officer; and Tony Casciano, our Chief Commercial Officer. Scott will kick off the call with some introductory remarks, including executing in a COVID-19 environment. Tony will provide a commercial update and Ted will cover our financial results and guidance. Scott will conclude the call with the status of our 2020 goals and then we'll open up the call for Q&A.

With that, it's my pleasure to now turn the call over to Scott.

Scott Myers -- President and Chief Executive Officer

Thanks Linda. Good morning everyone and thank you for joining us. I joined the company just about two weeks ago, and I'm very pleased to be fully engaged with the executive team and AMAG as a whole. I have been in the pharma, biotech and medtech space for nearly three decades. I've served as a Chairman and/or CEO in my last three roles leading the companies through a development stage and with their commercial assets. Most recently, I served as Chairman and CEO of Rainier Therapeutics, a clinical stage oncology company focused in metastatic bladder cancer. Previously, I served as CEO and Director at Cascadian Therapeutics. Cascadian's lead asset tucatinib, which is now TUKYSA at Seattle Genetics, in combination for treatment of HER2 positive metastatic breast cancer for patients with and without brain mets, was recently approved by the FDA. Seattle Genetics acquired all the assets of Cascadian in 2018. I also had the opportunity to be CEO of Aerocrine AB, a Swedish medtech company based in Stockholm, Sweden. I spent the development portion of my career in management consulting, before moving into industry and taking on increased senior management responsibilities, with companies such as Johnson & Johnson, DOV and UCB Pharma. In all, I lived and worked overseas for approximately nine years, so I look forward to bringing some of those perspectives and experiences to bear here at AMAG.

Many people have asked me why would you joined AMAG now, with the broader impacts of COVID and given AMAG's previously announced changes? The last several companies that I've helped lead also had a myriad of challenges, spanning their entire enterprise and we found solutions. I believe that will be the case here as well. This company has high-value products that meet critical unmet needs in the marketplace. We have fully integrated sales, marketing, sales operations and medical affairs to support the market and with the backdrop of COVID, our healthcare providers and their patients really need us at this point.

I'm looking for forward to helping AMAG become more nimble, improved decision-making and communication and engage even more actively with the shareholders. I've already spoken to a few shareholders, and we will continue this effort after this call, as well as have discussions with the analysts that provide coverage on AMAG.

In my short tenure, I've brought a few guiding principles that our executive team will continue to evolve the focus on what is important is the underlying theme; focus on our core business, manage expenses and headcount to be prepared to grow this company, utilize business development to bring in non-dilutive capital to strengthen our balance sheet and also look for products that can be added to our field teams promotional and medical education efforts.

The ultimate goal is to serve unmet needs for the patients and providers and if we do that efficiently through marketed products and developing the potential of our pipeline, unlocking the shareholder value can then begin. The Board of Directors and the executive leadership team, along with the rest of our AMAG associates, have welcomed me with open arms, so I'd like to share with you some excellent progress in a very challenging environment.

So let's turn to page 5; AMAG is going through an evolution, and as previously announced, we are progressing with our plans to divest Intrarosa and Vyleesi. We are in negotiations now and look forward to updating everyone by the end of second quarter. The transition out of consumer-driven women's health products will mark an important milestone on our path to increase shareholder value and sharpen our focus on our priorities and maximizing Feraheme's value, retaining patient access to Makena and continuing to efficiently develop innovative therapies, including ciraparantag.

Despite solid first quarter results, AMAG's products are being adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, as patient visits have declined during this period. This should not be surprising as across the country, the pandemic has led to decline in medical visits for conditions and illnesses not related to COVID-19. Given the impact of COVID-19 in the planned divestiture of Intrarosa and Vyleesi, AMAG has made the decision to implement a companywide restructuring of about 30% of our workforce. In total, we reduced our headcount by about 140 positions. This was a very difficult decision, I'd like to take a moment to recognize the contributions of our colleagues who are leaving AMAG, and wish them well.

As we look toward the future, we believe we have taken steps to right size our organization. We are laser focused on maximizing hematology, oncology and maternal health, reviewing our existing pipeline and developing innovative therapies. We are currently in the process of exploring additional opportunities to grow our hematology-oncology business, both on the business development front, as well as lifecycle management.

I am now going to turn it over to Tony to provide a commercial update. Tony?

Tony Casciano -- Executive Vice President and Chief Commercial Officer

Thank you, Scott, and good morning everyone. On slide 6, I'd like to take just a few minutes to provide an update on our performance in the quarter for both Feraheme and Makena. I'll then do my best to provide you with some color on the COVID impact we are seeing today.

Starting with Feraheme, yet another strong performance by our Hem/Onc team with record revenues of $44.4 million in the first quarter, which was an increase of 11% over the same period last year. This quarter marks the second full year following, our IDA label expansion in early 2018. And in that time, the team has consistently delivered strong results, more than doubling the Feraheme patient share in the hematology/oncology segment of our business 18.4% in Q1 of 2018, to nearly 40% in Q1 2020, in what has been a truly remarkable launch.

Turning to Makena; we finished the quarter with $21.8 million in revenue, which was [Technical Issues] below the same quarter last year and $3.8 million [Phonetic] below Q4 2019. As a reminder, this was our first full quarter following the FDA Advisory Committee meeting last October. While revenue was down quarter-over-quarter, that seems a nice job stabilizing monthly patient enrollments prior to the pandemic.

As Scott mentioned, declines in medical business where conditions and illnesses not related to COVID-19 have been widely reported, and our products, especially Feraheme, have not been immune to that impact. As you might be aware, Feraheme is administered with two infusions, typically in a critical care [Phonetic] hospital and the patient's ability to access those treatment settings, has become challenged. We believe this dynamic will negatively impact Feraheme sales in the second quarter, as we've already observed volume declines in the month of April.

For Makena we've seen smaller impacts over the same time period, as our customers are finding alternative ways to get these high-risk patients their injections during the pandemic. More recently, we have begun seeing leading indicators of recovery, with consecutive weeks of increasing outflow for Feraheme and patient enrollments for Makena. But to be clear, we have not yet returned to pre-COVID levels. And while we believe the underlying patient need for both products remains high, the speed and extent of the recovery largely depends on the fee mix [Phonetic] and on patient visit normalization and healthcare providers ability to administer treatment for those in need. While we don't yet know the full impact of COVID in our business, we do believe that as policymakers begin to to remove the stay-at-home orders and people begin to participate in their normal routines, patients will once again head back to doctor's offices and infusion centers to receive the treatments they need. We believe the patients will be there on the pandemic has passed, and we will be there to ensure they have access to our medications.

I'll now pass it over to Ted for the financial update.

Edward Myles -- Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and Chief Operating Officer

Thanks Tony. Since Tony just covered revenue for Feraheme, which were strong and Makena, which appears to have stabilized after the Q4 AdCom meeting, I'll start with operating expenses here on slide 7. As you can see from the year-over-year trends, we have been managing expenses carefully as we've navigated our strategic evolution and the COVID-19 pandemic. We had a couple of one-time expenses in the first quarter of 2019 related to the acquisition of Perosphere Pharmaceuticals and a restructuring charge related to our Women's Health and Maternal Health salesforce combination. Excluding those two items, operating expenses decreased by approximately 20% year-over-year.

SG&A expenses decreased by 29% year-over-year. A key driver in our Q1 2019 SG&A spend was the DTC campaign to support Intrarosa. We reduced our investment in that product during the second half of the year, driving the favorable trend you see in the comparison to the first quarter of 2020. Year-over-year R&D expenses decreased by approximately 38%, Vyleesi was approved in June of 2019, so the R&D spend on that product significantly decreased in the second half of last year. These decreases in operating expenses were partially offset by an increase in cost of product sales, due to an increase of approximately $6 million in non-cash amortization expense driven by the fourth quarter revision of the estimated useful life of the intangible assets related to Makena, Intrarosa and Vyleesi.

Our year-over-year operating loss decreased significantly to $19.6 million compared to $117 million in last year's first quarter. As part of our stated strategy to return to profitability, our adjusted EBITDA loss decreased significantly to $5.5 million in the first quarter compared to a loss of over $26 million in the first quarter of last year.

Moving to slide 8; in January, we issued 2020 financial guidance, provided here on the left side of the slide. That took into account the divestiture of our Women's Health assets and our goal of becoming adjusted EBITDA positive. While that guidance captured a wide range of potential outcomes for our business, as we navigated through a year of uncertainty, it did not account for a global pandemic and its impact on our business.

Because the severity and duration of the pandemic and the subsequent speed of any recovery is so uncertain, it is impossible to reasonably predict how this recovery will look and how long it will take for patient visits to return to some form of pre-pandemic status. We therefore made the decision to withdraw our 2020 financial guidance at this time. As Tony mentioned earlier, we have some leading indicators to suggest that the decline may have stabilized, we just don't know if the indicators we saw in April are representative of the remainder of the quarter or the remainder of the year. It's important to note that while there is new risk in our top line, we remain committed to the previously stated goal of reducing total operating expenses by more than $100 million in 2020, as compared to 2019, and returning the company to profitability. This workforce reduction that we announced this morning is an important step in achieving these objectives and rightsizing the organization for the future. We will continue to closely monitor the impact of COVID-19 in our business and financials and plan to reinstitute financial guidance as soon as we can provide a reasonable range.

Please turn to slide 9; at AMAG, we are very committed to the health and safety of our employees, patients, healthcare providers and business partners. We have taken numerous actions to-date to ensure business continuity. These steps have been working very well and we are continuing to call upon our customers, interact with government and private payers. We continue to focus on these important activities to make sure, healthcare providers can help their patients, regain or maintain access to our essential products.

After review with our manufacturing partners, at this time, we do not anticipate that COVID-19 will materially impact our ability to supply the market in the near term. We continue to work diligently with our suppliers to maintain continuous supply, as the COVID-19 situation evolves. On the clinical development front, we have experienced delays in our ongoing AMAG-423 Phase IIb-IIIa clinical trial and our planned ciraparantag Phase IIb trial due to COVID-19. Again while we cannot estimate the severity and duration of the pandemic and subsequent speed of recovery, we do expect these delays to continue to impact trial site initiations and patient enrollment for these trials. We are working with our CROs to reduce spend on these trials during this period. While we remain committed to developing products that could create the next leg of growth for the company, we cannot confirm timing of our development progress. We do look forward to updating you at the appropriate time.

I'll now hand it back to Scott to remind you of our goals and wrap up today's call. Scott?

Scott Myers -- President and Chief Executive Officer

Thanks Ted. I'd ask everyone to turn to page 10 and review our goals and the status where we stand now. We continue to execute on our 2020 goals, which are outlined and we are now making great strides toward those. I am pleased to have joined AMAG as the new CEO and lead the company at this critical juncture in its evolution. As we previously mentioned, we are progressing the Intrarosa and Vyleesi divestitures and we will provide an update by the end of the second quarter. We remain steadfast about driving Feraheme growth and despite the challenges resulting from COVID-19, we are keeping our sales, sales support, medical affairs teams fully engaged. We are working to continue our dialog with the FDA to maintain access to Makena for eligible pregnant women. As we shared in the press release this morning, the FDA responded to our request to discuss the future of Makena and indicated it was premature to hold a meeting at this time. We continue to actively market and support Makena in the marketplace. We are committed to work collaboratively with the FDA to support continued availability to Makena and its patients. As expected, COVID-19 has resulted in delays to the AMAG-423 and ciraparantag development programs The AMAG-423 Phase IIb and IIIa clinical trials is a hospital-based trial and all sites have paused new patient enrollment and the company has had to pause initiation of new sites due to the pandemic, thus significantly impacting recruitment and enrollment. AMAG continues to work with the FDA to initiate the ciraparantag Phase IIb trial in healthy volunteers in the U.S., but the COVID-19 pandemic has also forced the clinical trial sites, where the company expected to conduct the trial to close during the pandemic.

We continue to explore ex-U.S. portfolio partnering opportunities for our established brands and our pipeline. Ws we look toward the future, we remain committed to managing our business to further our goal of achieving profitability in 2020. There is no doubt that we've had some unforeseen headwinds with COVID-19. However, we will do everything in our control to closely manage our expenses and maximize our portfolio.

Given the challenge that all of us are having in this remote situation, I will either answer the questions after the operator opens up the line or direct the questions to a member of my executive team. This concludes our formal remarks and I now ask the operator open the call for questions.

